In this section, I'll be talking about string.
First, let us understand what is a string?
String is a collection of characters or letters.
See, by grouping the letters, we can form a word or a name.
Like.
This is a name of a person.
Right.
There's a name of a person.
And there's a name of a place that is city name.
Even it may be a complete address and it may be a sentence like this, like this is also a string or
a paragraph is also a string.
You can have different size of string.
The larger size is allowed more than 2000 characters you can have in a string.
So depends on the compiler and its versions.
The sizes are different.
So 2000 characters is more than enough.
So in our programs we can use the strings for storing names or words or sentences or paragraphs.
Now, as we said, string is a collection of characters, so let us see that.
See, this is a string.
This is a name.
So here is a letter and I is also a letter C Etch A, E, L all these are letters.
So it's a collection of alphabets.
So the set of alphabets together is forming a string.
Now I will show you how to represent a string, and we will also learn the possible operations on a
string.
In C++, there are two methods of representing a string.
One is using array of characters.
So as I said that a string is a set of characters that is array of characters.
And the second thing is C++ is also providing a class called String.
This method is available in C language and also it can be used in C++.
So this is one of the method that is using a character array.
And the second method is C++ is also having a class called String.
So in C++, we prefer using this class whenever we want to store a string.
This is a good option.
So what we will learn about both of these methods, first, I will show you about character array and
then I'll show you string class.
So let us start with a string using character array.
So here I will discuss how we can declare a string and how we can initialize it.
So if you look at this, this is just a character care x.
So X is a character type variable which can store only a single letter.
So if you see a character takes one bite of memory, so A is stored in that one.
So it's ASCII code that is ASCII code of A will be stored in that one bite of memory character type
variable can store just a single letter.
They cannot store a string like this.
They cannot store like this for storing a string.
We have to take an array.
So this is an array of type character.
And when you use double codes, it's a string.
If you observe here, I have used single codes here for character constant and here for string constant
double codes are used.
So this we will call it as a string literal.
This is a little or this is constant.
Now what happens when you declare an array and also initialize it with the string?
Let us see here.
So an array of size ten will be created.
As I have mentioned, size is ten.
So idea of size ten is created.
And in that all these alphabets are stored like each is a character, so each location can store a single
character.
So hell0 are stored.
And this is one of the important things that we have to learn.
This is a null character or a string delimiter, we call it as string delimiter.
She is also called as a character.
So
this is a combination of two characters, that is.
Backslash and zero.
This is not oh, this is zero number zero backslash and zero.
And it's a character.
Its value is zero.
So it is also called as null character or string delimiter or a string.
Terminator also you can call.
So in C as well as in C++, when you are using an array of characters, then definitely the string will
be having zero at the end.
It terminates with the slash zero.
So here you can observe.
I have taken an array of size ten, so the capacity of this array is ten.
But I have stored only five letters in this one.
Then there must be some character to show where the string is ending.
So this acts as a string terminator.
Now next next method of initialize declaration and initialization here have declared in character array
and I'm initializing this one.
I did not mention the size here.
The size was mentioned here it is not mentioned.
So it will automatically create an array of exact size, including the space for a string terminator
that is null character.
Then let us look at next method here.
I have not mentioned the size, but I am initializing a character array.
This is just like initializing character array, but this null character is also included and inclusion
of this character makes it as a string.
Without this character, it is not a string.
Then one more method here.
Even you can use the ASCII codes of the alphabet.
So I have used 65, 66, 67.
So actually alphabets capital A, B, C, D will be stored here.
So these alphabets will be stored here.
So it will store capital.
A 65 is for capital B is 66, then C, then D, then null character.
This array will be created.
Right now there is one more method.
Using a pointer we can create a string.
So this will be creating an array and as is the pointer that will be pointing on to that string.
So broadly, there are two methods.
One is using a character and second one is using a pointer.
Mostly we use a pointer to a string if we want to have a string inside heap, right?
So we just declare it and here I have already initialize it.
So this is nothing but a literal.
This is a literal and literals are created inside code section.
So this will be actually created in code section.
And then later on, if we want to store any other value into this one, any other string, then it will
be created inside heap.
So if you want a string in heap, then go for character pointer.
If you want it in a stack, then go for character array.
So these are the two methods use either character array or either use a pointer to a string.
Now, next, I'll give you the demonstration for this one.
How these things can be declared and initialize.
So let us look at the demonstration for this one.
So here already I have a main function ready.
So let me create a string cat.
As of size ten.
Then here I will store.
Hello.
Then I want to display this one.
So let us say see out se and also I will use NL for the next line.
Now let us run this and see.
Yeah.
Hello is displayed here.
See, though, I have taken an array of size ten, but it is displaying only five letters.
Because after this fifth letter there is a null character.
So see out will stop there at null character.
So that null character indicates the end of a string.
So most of the functions or operations build in C++ uses that null character to find the end of a string.
Now here, I will remove this size and I will run it again.
Once again.
Yeah, this is working.
So without mentioning the size also, I can do that.
Now I will show you one more method creating a string by initializing each and every alphabet.
So I will take this each letter.
So I'm initializing array of characters.
Right?
So these are all alphabets.
Now, the next thing is slash zero, right?
Now, this is also another method of creating a string.
So it has displayed up to Hello.
Now I'll show you one more thing here.
I have given slash zero.
Then beyond this, I'll give you more characters.
Letter P, then one more P than one more p.
Let us see what happens.
So here is a/0.
So I should stop here after.
Hello?
It should not print this p, right?
Yes, it is printing only.
Hello.
So this shows that it is stopping at null character.
That is slash zero.
That's it.
Now let me create a string by giving ASCII codes of alphabets.
That's 65, 66, 67 and 68.
Then for another character, I'll give Slash zero.
That is a character I have given in single course.
Now, let us run this one.
Yes, I got a BCD.
Now I said that null character is nothing but zero.
So I'll mention zero there and let us see whether it works or not.
Yes, it is working.
After the zero I'll give 69 and 70 also means E and fc0 is here, right?
Zero is here.
So whether it will print these to let us check.
No, it prints only a BCD.
So instead of suddenly character that is zero, even you can use a numeric value that is integer value
zero.
Now lastly, I'll show you one more method that is using a pointer.
So this is not supported by latest compiler of C++.
Let us take a pointer and here I will give a string that is string literal or the string constant.
Yeah.
There is a warning that C++ 11 doesn't allow conversion from a string literal to a character pointer.
So let us run it and see if it's working just as giving a warning.
So it is suggesting don't use this one right.
This will not work perfectly always.
As I said in C++, we have a class called String which will be learning afterwards.
But let us take string as and here I will initialize it with the zero.
Hello, that is a string.
Hell, I'm initialized now here doesn't give any error message.
Just I want to show you the error message.
So C++ supports a string class, so it's asking you to take a string class better instead of taking
a character pointer.
Right.
So here in my compiler, in my C++ compiler settings, it's giving a warning.
So try it on your machine.
So that's all I have shown you.
What is a string?
And I have shown you how to initialize and also have given demonstration.
So I suggest you you do this one by yourself after watching this video.
You do all these things by yourself and be ready with this one.
So further we will see operations on strings.